In 1952, I have listed here a ball breaker
signaling device.
Well, that was kind of fun. And I must say, as usual,
these things have a little more implication than
they sound like. That was Art Maxwell and me, I
think. At any rate, at that time, there was a lot of
importance of measuring, taking cores on the
ocean bottom and taking temperature gradient in
the ocean bottom, which required very precise
lowering of devices at great depths in the ocean.
Temperature probes. And it was important to know
when you were on bottom. And these were depths of
4,000 fathom or so, you see. 3,000 fathom. Well,
you've got a lot of cable out. There's a fairly
light instrument on the bottom of it. There's
really no way to tell when you're on the bottom of
it. And so... You needed something that told you
when you hit bottom.
Well, there was quite a lot of possibilities of how
you did this. And there have certainly been much
more sophisticated devices since. But this, we
rigged up one real fast. And it was a glass ball with
a hammer and a trip. And when it hit bottom, the
hammer came down and presumably smashed the glass
ball. And the ocean, finding itself unsupported,
since there's now a hole in the middle of it at 2,000
or 3,000. Fathom rushes in, and the noise it makes
when it meets itself coming from all sides is
considerable. There's a lot of power in that. And
you hear this bang on the surface, so you know
you've hit bottom. Well, it turned out to be much
more difficult to break these damn glass balls. I
suspected it. Then you'd have a hammer that'd just
smash into pieces on the surface. But under this
pressure, it didn't do anything. It just bounced.
You make a point on the hammer, big hammer, you
know, dropping. You make a point on the hammer, the
hammer would sometimes go into the ball and seal.
Other times it would go in and knock a shell off and
the ball would be intact when you came up.
Sometimes the ball would crack all the pieces but
not break. It would all be held together by the
pressure. Well, we finally made the proper kind of
point that it always broke the ball. But this, of
course, had led... That paper, incidentally,
then, and our remarks about the difficulty of
breaking the ball have led to the utilization of
glass capsules in underwater vehicles and
spherical capsules in underwater instruments of
all sorts, because glass obviously requires
quite different properties under these very high
pressures. Excuse me. I have high-speed
plankton. sampler in 1958. Yeah, that was a kind of
fun device. When we were first starting out, 1958?
Oh, we designed that much earlier than that. That
was when the paper came out, I guess. It came out
years later. That was back in 1951 or so, or 53
maybe. It was a torpedo-shaped plankton sampler
that could be towed at high speed at considerable
depth. And it had a neat little recorder in it that
told you how deep it was and how much water was
passing through it at each depth. It worked very
well.
It was used for quite a few years. I have, in 1966, an
Isaacs-Brown opening-closing trawl. That's
just a modification of the midwater trawl that
allows you to open and close it at some depth. Now,
the last two things I would like some elaboration
on. 1968, a deep sea observational camera system.
Well, over a series of years we developed these
cameras. They were free fall cameras that you
could chuck over the ship's side. And they went to
increasing sophistication. We designed them in
several different forms. They went to the bottom.
They usually had a bait in the foreground
somewhere, a mass of fish or something. And they
sat down there taking pictures every five minutes
or 10 minutes, sometimes still pictures,
sometimes movies, motion pictures, and
sometimes stereo motion pictures. We had some
interesting stereo motion pictures. And we
discovered a great deal about the deep benthic
fauna and how it behaved. what the distribution of
these creatures were, how they probably searched
for their food, and a whole different food web, you
see, of very active deep creatures, yes.
I think I'll try to revise that program because
it's kind of a natural for a cooperation with small
coastal countries because the cameras can be
operated from unspecialized vehicles. They can
be dropped over the side and sections taken down
across the shelf and find out what really lives in
these deeps. We find, for instance, along this
coast that some of the commercial fish of British
Columbia and southern Alaska and Washington,
probably their main population is down here off
Baja California at great depths. They're
creatures of the cold, dark waters, and they
merely outcrop up in the Arctic regions or near
Arctic regions. And that's where the principal
commercial fishery is based. But the population
itself extends to increasing depths down farther
and farther and closer to the equator. We find a big
population of great arctic sharks off the Baja
California coast, for example. A shark very much
like the
Icelandic or Greenland shark. Huge one. lots of
shrimp, we'd find deep lobsters, we'd find all
sorts of things. When did you first become
interested in photography?
You mean in underwater photography? In
underwater photography and above water
photography. Well, I became much impressed by the
competency of first-rate cameras to record
things at Bikini, I think. Well, before that, I was
in charge of the photography of the two A-bomb
shots in 1946. And the fact that these big aerial
cameras would allow you to place in space and in
position ships and explosive phenomena and so on
and so forth, I thought was, when they were rigidly
based on land, was a very powerful technique.
I've used these kinds of cameras in determining
the motion of an amphibious craft in the surf zone.
In that early work at Berkeley, you see, by
mounting cameras on shore and aiming them aerial
cameras, big mapping aerial cameras on shore
aimed at amphibious craft coming through the
surf. You then could position a craft exactly in
space continuously, see just what its motions
were. On a big craft, you could even measure the
bending of the hull. Well, I was much impressed by
the competency of first-class mapping cameras
used in those kind of modes. And, of course, I've
always wanted to see what did the ocean do with a
dead whale on its bottom? What in the devil does it
do with it? It increases the food supply in square
miles for years, a dead whale. It must be adapted to
utilize it. And so it turns out it is.
Because
I'd been doing this radio-controlled
photography. We not only had two aerial cameras
shooting at amphibious craft in the surf, but a
radio-controlled camera and a planar blimp up
above photographing simultaneously with radio
control. She triggered the shots in an automatic
system. And then Revell asked you then to go to
Bikini and mount cameras, which would do
something? Be in charge of the photography. Be in
charge of photography, right. OK. Oh, the
land-based photography. Well, the
radio-controlled photography. And did you use
the same techniques there that you had used?
Essentially, yeah. Did you make any substantial
changes? Oh, well, of course, they had lots more
backups and things, because there was no going
back and repairing the cameras. And so we built the
towers, and we designed the backups. And the
backups were, of course, it was uncertain at that
time what would happen to radio signals at the time
of an atomic explosion. So we had not only a central
radio triggering
synchronizers for the total cameras, airborne
and land, But we had backup individual timers on
each camera. So if it failed to get its pulses, it
asked for another one. If it got another one and
didn't respond, then it took its own picture
anyway. And as a matter of fact, that saved our neck
just at the instant of the explosion. That's what
Revell said, exactly what happened. He did? Yeah.
When was that? When I interviewed him. He
suggested that the camera work here was not only
splendid, but it involved innovation, which had
not been done before in camera. Yeah, yeah, yeah.
That's right. And so exactly what happened? Why
did the cameras fail the first time? Oh, just
because of the tremendous electrostatic charge
that is built up at that instance. You see a vast
amount of static just for that instant shot. So we
got pictures.
The bomb had gone off under water, the bottom of the
fleet was lit up, and the Shockwave had not yet
arrived at the surface. In thirty fathom of water.
The bottom of the fleet was lit. And there's not a
pimple on the surface yet. That's pretty
remarkable photography.
Now, was it contact here on Bikini Atoll? Is this
the contact that brings you to Scripps
Institution? This contact with Revelle here? No,
I don't know. The first time I ever remember
Revelle was an interesting case, as a matter of
fact. I'd built the first of these sea sleds. And we
were at Morro Bay, California. And I had built it,
and then I was out on the beach, and we were going to
test it for the first time. We had a duck, and we had a
big spool of rope, just rope, manila rope. And I had
attached this, and I had two helpers, two duck
drivers. I had attached this roll, and we had it on a
standard. And I said, well, we just started in the
surf. First time we ever started a sea sled. And the
commandant of the little naval base there came
down and says, there's an important young
lieutenant at the train in San Luis Obispo. You're
supposed to go pick up. I'd never heard of a bell
before. So I got in the car and went down and picked
up this young, slender, tall lieutenant and
brought him back. And we came down on the beach. And
here are these two guys. I told him about this sea
sled for taking a line through the sea. Here are
these two guys, 6,000 feet of line, standing out in
the ocean. cable spool is pulled off the standards
they've got an oar shoved through the through the
cable spool and it's plowing the sand down towards
the beach so obviously they're being pulled into
the surf both of them i grabbed the duck then and ran
a wire out from the winch at the stern of it and got
hold of it they hadn't had time to do this thing was
obvious so it was an interesting First
introduction to Ravel and our work there, he was
immensely impressed by that damn sea sled, I must
say. You know, this kind of mysteriously line
going out into the ocean, these two guys, and of
course I'm obviously shocked and excited. So that
was my first introduction to him. We then took him
out in the surf in the duck. He'd never been out in a
BUKW, you know, a wheeled vehicle. Marvelous
vehicles. Marvelous. We never really managed to
sink one in any reasonable sort of... I have a
picture of one with a 28-foot breaker coming up on
it. I was in. I survived it, obviously. Well,
anyway, so that was my first introduction to
Ravel. Maybe 1945, I don't know when it was. He was
just organizing the O&R. Marvelous man. And,
well, who specifically taps you to do the
photography at Bikini? He does. Ravel. He does.
All right. And then after photography, there,
and... I got interested in radioactivity. Okay.
And waves. In fact, that's one of the reasons we did
the photography. It turned out it really was
necessary to place all the ships in the exact
position. But then, of course, the main purpose
was the wave theory, what kind of explosive waves
were produced by these sorts of things. And that's
what we followed them on the bigger shots later.
the waves. What sort of wave did you expect? From
that? Oh, just about what came, what we produced,
yeah. Some people argue that the wave would be, you
know, untold feet high and would... Well, that
was, those were interesting days when we first
shot off the Beglands out there because it wasn't a
bit clear that the atoll would necessarily not
collapse. And we had some of the best world-famous
Kistiakowsky, the famous soil machination. You
see, a coral atoll is really kind of a barrel full of
mud, a thin shell, a brittle shell. And it's clear
that coral atolls only exist where there are no
earthquakes.
So there was a real question. Was the thing stable
or not? The bomb itself probably couldn't make a
highly destructive wave.
over the atoll, it might in critical depth and deep
water. But as part of the atoll collapsed, then the
amount of energy that got linked into a wave was
gigantic, you see. And we surely didn't know
whether that would take place or not. And there
lies a tale of where we almost evacuated the
Pacific Basin by accident. Someday we'll go into
that one. Was that the cloud mist that appeared?
No, no. No, no.
I don't know if this tale has ever quite been told.
This was at Ivy Mike, the first big gauge bomb. And
it was shot off on an island in the north of Bikini,
northwest of Bikini. Totally obliterated the
island. And at that time, we didn't know whether it
would produce a huge wave or not. So we set off on a
seamount about 700 feet deep. We mounted two
floating wave gauges. And we had the Horizon, one
of our ships, and Walter Monk was there, and Bill
Bascom was there, and a fellow by the name of
Commander Monk Hendricks.
And we had these two, and we were going to stay with
them 12 minutes, which was after the bomb went off.
and see if there was going to be a great change in
water level. And we had a set of signals. And
everything was set up to start the evacuation of
Pacific Coast cities if we had a big one. Well, the
bomb went off. We stayed there the 12 minutes. The
cloud was overhead at this time. We practiced
getting these skiffs back ashore, aboard. Not our
moorings, just the skiffs we ran. So we watched
that first H-bomb from skiffs 26 miles away. And
the open water with the horizon was well away.
Well, we had practiced getting those skiffs back
aboard and us aboard. And the earliest we could do
it was something like 15 minutes. But with that
cloud overhead, we got it done in something like
five. Every hand was there pulling. Well, we then
got in the fallout. We took more fallout than any
fixed point on the Earth's surface has ever
gotten. because we were conned into following a
path that eventually turned out we were following
the point of maximum fallout for something like 17
hours. Anyway, days later, we got back to the
skiffs and picked them up. One minute after we left
that skiff, one of these moorings showed a record
of a 50-foot wave. Something had gone wrong with
it. What had happened was the
pressure gauge had not locked into its position
and had suddenly let loose and slid down the cable
50 feet. But of course, we wouldn't have known
that. It went up 50 feet and stayed there. But if
we'd been there and seen the 50-foot, we would have
certainly called for the evacuation of the
Pacific cities of the North Pacific. And the
fiasco would have been absolutely gigantic.
Scripps' name would have been totally mud. When
did you come to Scripps? Well, I oscillated
between Scripps and Berkeley for a year or more in
about 1948 or thereabouts. I first applied to
Scripps in 1936 for a job. I had been commercial
fishing. I had gotten a lot of questions about my
mind about the oceans. I asked very puzzling
things, still puzzling. I had written a letter to
Scripps asking why these things were taking
place. I got an answer which really didn't address
the questions I'd asked. Just like, you know, even
today, why you get all kinds of questions from
fishermen and one thing or another. So I thought,
boy, those guys need some help, you know, down
there. And it seems to me, I can't answer these
kinds of questions, so I applied for a job. It took
me ten years to get here.
Director then, just freshly director, 1936.
Did it seem to you as if Scripps' institution
functioned better when it was smaller? Well, it
depends what you mean by better. It was a hell of a
lot more fun, I guess. In many ways, there was more
rapport, and there was more of a spirit of
adventure, I think. I was thinking about
interchange of ideas. I'm shocked that a guy comes
to you and says, how about a troll? You're involved
with a monk. Yeah. And did you seem to have more
exchange with your colleagues? Was it
compartmentalized then? Is it
compartmentalized now? Well,
I think an oceanographic institution
fundamentally has to be interdisciplinary. And I
think it perpetually tends to crystallize into
special forms of each of the disciplines again,
you see. There's a perpetual necessary to be
breaking up. There's a polymerization that goes
on, a crystallization that has to be continuously
combated. People like to talk to people who are in
their same field. There's no question about it.
Yet really the penetration and understanding of
the universe in general, and the oceans in
particular, and the planet in particular,
certainly requires a communication of all sorts.
And yet I think the ideal has to be accumulation
around temporary nuclei that then break up and
form new associations, and that's a hard thing to
form. Give me a follow-up on this. Now, when Ravel
goes to Pakistan, don't you go with him? No, I have
been with him. You have been with him to Pakistan.
Well, that's what I mean. On his first trip to
Pakistan to study the soil, weren't you part of
that? Sure, yeah. Okay. How would you be involved
in that? What was your connection with this
solization process? Well, obviously, the salt
eventually had its origins in the oceans. I mean,
as Ravel says, if you can understand a planet with
oceans, you also have to understand a planet
without them. That's why you should study Mars.
Kind of control, huh? One planet with, one planet
without. From that viewpoint, it's not much of a
stretch to say you ought to also look at the doabs of
West Pakistan, where the problem is salt. And I had
worked some on the salt of the Colorado River and
various other things. I was interested in
halophytic plants. I think they're really a vast
potential halophytic plants of this world, the
ones that are perfectly capable, the higher
plants that are perfectly capable of living in
seawater. Totally unexplored. Almost totally
unexplored. We have no idea what the total
genetics of all the halophytic plants of this
world are. Every time we even look at it, we find new
ones. Halophytic avocado, for instance.
Fortunellas, legumes.
You see. Our crop plants, the crop plants on which
man depends for his entire existence, strangely
were all developed by prehistoric man. We have
never developed a crop plant with any
consequence. In historic times, we've made
improvements, or sort of improvement. But all the
principal tremendous selections of polyploidy
and everything are made by primitive man. The only
thing we've developed in historic times are
grapefruit and poshelsprouts. And nobody's
going to feed the human race on those. So the whole
curious matter of increasing salination around
the world, of the increased need for utilization
of seawater for agriculture, of aquaculture and
so forth. And this vast array of plants, higher
plants, that know perfectly well how to
desalinate seawater all by themselves using
sunlight at high level energy rather than the
degraded form we can use it in, has really received
no attention. It's something Texas A&M ought to
get into.
Was this what originally attracted you to your
work on the Colorado River, or was it vice versa?
Well, I got interested in the Colorado River for a
very curious reason. I was plotting the total
dissolved solids of the Colorado River one time,
and several other rivers, including the Indus, as
a function of stream flow, annual stream flow. And
it turns out that instead of that line of plot of
total dissolved solids per year and total water
flow per year, extrapolating through the 0-0
axis, which is, say, zero dissolved solids
transported at zero flow, it goes through the
dissolved solid axis at rather high level. It's an
inclined line, which says, in the case of the
Colorado, that at zero flow, it's transporting
3,600,000 tons of salt. Well, the only possible
explanation for such a decent river, like the
Mississippi, goes through the 0-0 axis. But both
the Indus and the Colorado do not. The only
possible explanation for this is that there are
brine springs feeding into the rivers, brine
springs, not salt springs, but concentrated
brines, which are continuously flowing. So that
as the river goes down, a year of low flow, the slant
is higher.
We start hunting for those springs, which we
assume must exist, and we found none of them in the
hydrological literature at all. We found them in
anthropological literature. The Indians knew
about these brine springs flowing into Colorado,
and the first one we looked for was a great series of
volcano-like structures of pure salt with pure
saturated brine flowing down into Colorado.
600,000 tons a year. and i thought you know the
hydrological mythology is the river supplies you
with water that god has determined the quality
that is now your problem nobody ever inquires as to
how it got that quality huh so now here's six just
this one spring six hundred thousand tons is
enough to put fifteen thousand acres out of
existence every year by salination but it's a
small flow why not build a little brick retainer
and pump the damn stuff back up on the mesa or inject
it into the ground and keep it out of the Colorado.
Can't get anybody interested in that.
Reclamation Department doesn't do that sort of
thing. Agriculture Department care less. That's
not part of their problem. And so it still flows
into the Colorado as far as I know.
And then there's undoubtedly six more like that.
And out of curiosity, you think anthropological
sites can locate these? That's how we locate it.
Because the Indians had a real mythology about the
trek, the salt trek, which was kind of a young
manhood trek to go down in this great canyon and
climb down these cliffs and gather the salt and
bring it back. And that's all recorded in 1896.
That's where we found it. We even found the old
ladder that the first man who went down there early
in the century had built to get down one of these
cliffs, all full of salt drift and crystals of
salt. What made you decide to check
anthropological literature? Well, it's obvious
that if she was going to find out what the Indian
names of these damn streams are, they'd surely
know whether they had salt in them or not.
And, of course, the Indus does the same thing. I
mean, it's easy. There's a place called Salt
Mountain or Salt Hill. It's by Sarco. And it flows
into the Indus. Salt water.
Anyway, that's only part of it. But it's
interesting, it seems to me. And it's an
interesting commentary on our bureaucracy.